docs: upgrade guide from `v0.38.x` to `v1.0` (#4184)
cometbft/cometbft: docs/guides/upgrades/v0.38-to-v1.0.md

---
order: 4
title: CometBFT v0.38.x to v1.0
---

# Upgrading from CometBFT v0.38.x to v1.0

This guide outlines the key updates and adjustments needed when upgrading from CometBFT
v0.38.x to v1.0. It highlights significant changes and provides references to additional
documentation for a smoother transition.

The introduction of CometBFT `v1.0` brings numerous new features. This guide outlines the

> most significant additions anc changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
most significant additions and changes.
```

For additional information about changes please refer to the [CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md)
and [UPGRADING.md](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/UPGRADING.md) documents.

> **NOTE**: It is essential to emphasize that this is a [major version bump](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/README.md#versioning)
> upgrade (`v0.38.x` -> `v1.0`). Therefore, a **coordinated upgrade** is necessary. A mixed network with `v0.38.x` and `v1.0` nodes is **not supported**.

## Proposer-Based Timestamps (PBTS)

CometBFT `v1.0` contains a new algorithm for generating and verifying block timestamps
called Proposer-Based Timestamps (`PBTS`).
The existing algorithm used in CometBFT releases prior to `v1.0`, called [BFT-Time][bft-time] is kept for backwards compatibility.

Upgrading to `v1.0` **does not automatically switch the chain from BFT-Time

> to PBTS**; rather a `ConsensusParam` called `PbtsEnableHeight` can be set to a future

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to PBTS**; rather a `ConsensusParam` called `PbtsEnableHeight` was introduced and can be set to a future
```

height to transition from BFT-Time to PBTS.

This flexible mechanism allows chains disentangle the upgrade to `v1.0` from the transition
in the algorithm used for block times.

For further information, please check the [PBTS specification][pbts-spec].

## ABCI Mutex

> CometBFT's existing `ABCI` local client is prevented from making

Reviewer 2: I think it is not clear for everyone what an ABCI client is.

In any case, I think we should mention that this only applies to the case where Comet and the ABCI application run in the same process.

concurrent calls to ABCI implementations by virtue of a mutex taken
by the client's implementation.

In the `v1.0` release, two additional [local ABCI clients have been added](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/1141).

> 1.The first, supports one different mutex per ABCI connection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.T he first adopts one mutex per ABCI connection
```

(consensus connection, mempool connection, etc.), allowing concurrency

> in the application in different ABCI connections, but still serializing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when CometBFT calls methods from different ABCI connections, but still serializing
```

ABCI calls within the same connection.

> 2.The second, totally removes mutexes from the ABCI client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The second totally removes mutexes from the ABCI client.
```

> When using either of the new ABCI clients, the application is now

Reviewer 2: I think you need to skip a line here, otherwise this will be part of item 2.

> responsible to coordinate concurrent ABCI calls in order to prevent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
responsible for coordinating concurrent ABCI calls in order to prevent
```

> race conditions or the possibility of non-determinism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
race conditions or non-deterministic behavior.
```

If you are uncertain about how to ensure these guarantees in your application,

> it is strongly recommended to continue using the existing ABCI client, which contains

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it is strongly recommended to continue using the existing ABCI client, which relies on
```

a single global mutex.

## Protobuf Changes

Several major changes have been implemented relating to the Protobuf
definitions:

> CometBFT now makes use of the `cometbft.*` Protobuf definitions in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CometBFT now makes use of the `cometbft.*` Protobuf definitions under
```

All CometBFT Protobuf packages include a version whose number will be independent of
the CometBFT version. As mentioned in (1), the `tendermint.types.Block` type is now available under
`cometbft.types.v1.Block` - the `v1` in the type path indicates the version of the `types` package
used by this version of CometBFT. The Protobuf definitions that are wire-level compatible (but not type
path-compatible) with CometBFT `v0.34.x`, ``v0.37.x`` and `v0.38.x`, where breaking changes were introduced, are available under `v1beta*`-versioned types.

For example:

- The `tendermint.abci.Request` type from CometBFT `v0.34.x` is now available as `cometbft.abci.v1beta1.Request`.
- The `tendermint.abci.Request` type from CometBFT `v0.37.x` is now available as `cometbft.abci.v1beta2.Request`.
- The `tendermint.abci.Request` type from CometBFT `v0.38.x` is now available as `cometbft.abci.v1beta3.Request`.

All Go code generated from the `cometbft.*` types is now available under the
   [`api`](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/tree/main/api) directory. This directory is also an independently versioned
   Go module. This code is still generated using the Cosmos SDK's [gogoproto

>    fork](https://github.com/cosmos/gogoproto) at present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   fork](https://github.com/cosmos/gogoproto).
```
```

Several [ABCI-related types were renamed](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/1533) in order to align with [Buf
   guidelines](https://buf.build/docs/best-practices/style-guide/). `Request*`
   and `Response*` were renamed to `*Request` and `*Response` (e.g.
   `RequestQuery` was renamed to `QueryRequest`).

See the CometBFT Protobufs [README](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/tree/main/proto#readme) section for more details.

## Crypto

### BLS12-381 curve

CometBFT `v1.0` adds [support for BLS12-381](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/2765) keys. Since the implementation needs

> `cgo` and brings in new dependencies, a build flag `bls12381` can be used if you want to enable it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`cgo` and brings in new dependencies, a build flag `bls12381` needs to be used if you want to enable it.
```

## Mempool

### `nop` mempool

CometBFT `v1.0` provides an option of using a `nop` (no-op) mempool which,
if selected via configuration, turns off all mempool-related functionality in
CometBFT (e.g. ability to receive transactions, transaction gossip). CometBFT then

> expects applications to provide their transactions when it calls

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
expects applications to manage transactions and provide transactions to include in a new block when it calls
```

> `PrepareProposal`, and that application developers will need to use some external means

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `PrepareProposal` ABCI method, and that application developers will use some external means
```

> of disseminating their transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for disseminating their transactions.
```

If you want to use the `nop` mempool, change mempool's `type` to `nop` in your `config.toml`
file:

```toml
[mempool]
# - "nop"   : nop-mempool (short for no operation; the ABCI app is responsible
# for storing, disseminating and proposing txs). "create_empty_blocks=false"
# is not supported.
type = "nop"
```

### Internal `CheckTx` Go API changes

> The `Mempool` interface was modified on `CheckTx`. Note that this interface is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Mempool` interface was modified on `CheckTx` method. Note that this interface is
```

### Broadcast API removed

CometBFT `v0.38.x` offered a simplistic gRPC support with only one method equivalent to the `/broadcast_tx_commit` endpoint.
This has been [removed](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/659) from CometBFT `v1.0` in favor of
the new [Data Companion gRPC services](https://docs.cometbft.com/v1.0/explanation/data-companion/grpc).

The following configuration parameters in `config.toml` are not valid anymore in `v1.0`:

```toml
[rpc]

grpc_laddr = ""
grpc_max_open_connections = 900
```

## Data Companion API

CometBFT `v1.0` introduces support for a new Data Companion Pull API as specified in
[ADR-101](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/docs/references/architecture/adr-101-data-companion-pull-api.md)

### gRPC services

There is a whole new [section](#grpc-section) in the `config.toml` to support the new Data Companion gRPC services.

In the CometBFT `v1.0` configuration file, if the `laddr` parameter in the `[grpc]` section is not specified,
all the services will be **disabled**. If an address is specified, the node operator can selectively choose
which services individually should be enabled or disabled.

### Pruning service

> As part of the new Data Companion API, a new [Pruning Service](https://docs.cometbft.com/v1.0/explanation/data-companion/pruning) is available which can be used to influence

Reviewer: I would rewrite this to clarify that the pruning service is responsible for deleting past data (older than N blocks).

the pruning mechanism of the node.

> Please refer to the [Data Companion API documentation](https://docs.cometbft.com/v1.0/explanation/data-companion/intro) for additional information.

Reviewer: Do you think we should also say that the pruning configuration is explained below?

Author: good point, I'll add that
